Add deploy arbitrum chain with genesis json docs (#2712)
OffchainLabs/arbitrum-docs: docs/launch-arbitrum-chain/deploy-chain-with-geneis-json.mdx

# Deploying Arbitrum Chains Using Genesis Configuration

## Overview

> This guide demonstrates how to deploy an Arbitrum Orbit chain using a custom genesis.json configuration with the orbit-cli-tool and nitro's genesis generator. This approach allows you to deploy chains with pre-configured accounts, balances, and smart contracts in the genesis block.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide shows you how to deploy your Arbitrum chain using a custom `genesis.json` configuration with the orbit-cli-tool and Nitro's genesis generator. This approach lets you deploy chains with pre-configured accounts, balances, and smart contracts in the genesis block.

```

The deployment workflow consists of three main steps:

1. **Genesis Generation**: Using orbit-cli-tool (with orbit-sdk) to generate `genesis.json`
2. **Assertion Hash Calculation**: Using nitro's genesis generator to calculate the assertion hash
3. **Contract Deployment**: Using orbit-cli-tool to deploy rollup contracts

## Prerequisites

- Node.js and npm/yarn installed
- orbit-cli-tool repository cloned and configured
- nitro repository with genesis-generator compiled (If compiling locally, follow the [official nitro build documentation](/run-arbitrum-node/nitro/build-nitro-locally))
- Docker installed (If not compiling locally)
- Custom genesis configuration requirements (accounts, balances, contracts)

## Step 1: Generate Genesis Configuration

This step creates a custom genesis.json file that includes your specific chain parameters, account allocations, and any pre-deployed contracts needed for your Orbit chain.

> ### Setup
> 
> Navigate to your orbit-cli-tool directory and install dependencies:
> 
> ```bash
> cd orbit-cli-tool
> npm install

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Set up your environment

Navigate to your orbit-cli-tool directory and install dependencies:

```shell

```

# or
yarn install
```

> ### Create Account Allocations (Optional)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Create account allocations (optional)
```

If you need to allocate funds or deploy contracts in the genesis block, create an `alloc.json` file:

```json
{
  "0x0000000000000000000000000000000000007070": {
    "balance": "1000000000000000000000",
    "nonce": "1",
    "code": "0x608060405234801561000f575f80fd5b...",
    "storage": {
      "0x0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000404": "8ce8c13d816fe6daf12d6fd9e4952e1fc88850af0001"
    }
  }
}
```

**Note**: Account addresses can be specified with or without the `0x` prefix.

### Generate Genesis File

Run the genesis generation command:

> ```bash

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```shell
```

node index.js saveGenesis
```

This command performs the following actions:

- Generates a random chain ID for your Orbit chain
- Creates chain configuration with Arbitrum-specific parameters
- Loads account allocations from `alloc.json` (if present)
- Outputs a properly formatted `genesis.json` file

The generated `genesis.json` follows a specific format where:

- The `config` field is compact (single line) for Go tool compatibility
- Other fields use 2-space indentation for readability

> ### Verify Genesis File

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Verify genesis file
```

After generation, verify that your `genesis.json` contains:

- Valid chain ID
- Proper chain configuration parameters
- Account allocations (if specified)
- Correct formatting for subsequent processing

> ## Step 2: Calculate Genesis Block Hash and Assertion Hash

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Step 2: Calculate genesis block hash and assertion hash
```

> Using nitro's genesis generator, we calculate the hashes required for rollup deployment. The genesis generator processes your custom genesis.json and computes the assertion hash that will be used in the rollup contracts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using Nitro's genesis generator, you'll calculate the hashes required for rollup deployment. The genesis generator processes your custom `genesis.json` and computes the assertion hash that'll be used in the rollup contracts.
```

> ### Calculate Genesis Block Hash

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Calculate genesis block hash
```

You can calculate the genesis block hash using either a local build or Docker. Choose the method that best fits your environment.

> #### Method 1: Using Local Build
> 
> **Step 1: Install Prerequisites**
> 
> Visit the [official nitro build documentation](/run-arbitrum-node/nitro/build-nitro-locally) to install the required **prerequisite tools**.
> 
> **Step 2: Build Genesis Generator**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Method 1: Use local build

**Step 1: Install prerequisites**

Visit the [official Nitro build documentation](/run-arbitrum-node/nitro/build-nitro-locally) to install the required prerequisite tools.

**Step 2: Build genesis generator**
```

> Clone the nitro repository and build the genesis generator:
> 
> ```bash
> cd /path/to/nitro
> make target/bin/genesis-generator

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Clone the Nitro repository and build the genesis generator:

```shell
cd /path/to/nitro
make target/bin/genesis-generator
```

```

> **Step 3: Calculate Hash**
> 
> Run the genesis generator with your genesis.json file:
> 
> ```bash

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Step 3: Calculate hash**

Run the genesis generator with your `genesis.json` file:

```shell
```

./target/bin/genesis-generator --genesis-json-file ./genesis.json --initial-l1-base-fee {Your_estimate_parent_chain_gas_price}
```

> #### Method 2: Using Docker
> 
> This method is simpler and doesn't require building nitro locally.
> 
> ```bash

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Method 2: Use Docker

This method is simpler and doesn't require building Nitro locally.

```shell
```

docker run -v $(pwd):/data/genesisDir --entrypoint genesis-generator offchainlabs/nitro-node:v3.7.2-42be4fe --genesis-json-file /data/genesisDir/genesis.json --initial-l1-base-fee {Your_estimate_parent_chain_gas_price}
```

**Note**: Replace `{Your_estimate_parent_chain_gas_price}` with your estimated parent chain (Arbitrum Sepolia) gas price in wei (e.g., `1000000000` for 1 gwei).

> #### Expected Output
> 
> After running either method, you will see output similar to:
> 
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Expected output

After running either method, you'll see output similar to:

```shell
```

BlockHash: 0x6d429f9c36b7fd56c4296b5e1f963e465179d170a3d64be49b17c0af59c95794, SendRoot: 0xf5cac8d69a469505fbe822c19c6b534ded192b9db3cf6bd9063dc6dcb10212d6, Batch: 1, PosInBatch: 0
```

**Save the BlockHash**: Copy the `BlockHash` value (e.g., `0x6d429f9c36b7fd56c4296b5e1f963e465179d170a3d64be49b17c0af59c95794`) as you'll need it for the rollup deployment step.

#### ⚠️ Critical Requirement

**The L1 gas price used in `--initial-l1-base-fee` MUST be exactly identical to the actual gas price when deploying the rollup contracts.** Any difference will cause deployment failure.

> **Important Steps**:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Important steps**:
```

- Record the exact gas price value used in `--initial-l1-base-fee`
- When deploying the rollup, ensure the gas price for the deployment transaction is exactly the same
- If gas prices have changed at all, you must regenerate the genesis block hash with the current gas price

## Step 3: Deploy Rollup Contracts

The final step involves deploying the actual rollup contracts to Arbitrum Sepolia using the calculated genesis block hash.

> ### Deploy Rollup
> 
> Execute the rollup creation command with your genesis block hash:
> 
> ```bash

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Step 3: Deploy rollup contracts

The final step involves deploying the actual rollup contracts to Arbitrum Sepolia using the calculated genesis block hash.

### Deploy rollup

Execute the rollup creation command with your genesis block hash:

```shell
```

node index.js createRollup <genesis_block_hash>
```

Replace `<genesis_block_hash>` with the BlockHash value obtained from step 2.

**⚠️ Critical Requirement**: The gas price used for the rollup deployment transaction MUST be exactly identical to the `--initial-l1-base-fee` value used when generating the genesis block hash. Any difference will cause deployment failure. If gas prices have changed at all, regenerate the genesis block hash first.

> ### Deployment Process

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Deployment process
```

The rollup deployment will:

- Read the previously generated `genesis.json`
- Extract chain configuration and chain ID
- Deploy rollup contracts to Arbitrum Sepolia testnet

> ## Configuration Reference

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Configuration reference
```

> ### Genesis Configuration Structure

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Genesis configuration structure
```
